Create documentation for subqueries in OQL (#7572)
mendix/docs: content/en/docs/refguide/modeling/resources/data-sets/oql/oql-subqueries.md

---
title: "OQL Subqueries"
url: /refguide/oql-subqueries/
tags: ["studio pro"]

> ---

Reviewer: Should this have a `weight`?

Reviewer 2: They are currently in alphabetical order as none of these pages have a weight. So it will appear here:
![image](https://github.com/mendix/docs/assets/35492184/ec3aaa75-ea70-42d3-8f45-cb638c8740c4)
You can add weights if you want them in a different order.

Reviewer: That would be a non-obvious place. Better add some weights then.

Author: Then I guess we can reorder all pages here. What would be the right order then? Something like this?
```
OQL Select Clause
OQL From Clause
OQL Where Clause
OQL Group by Clause
OQL Limit Clause
OQL Order by Clause
OQL Subqueries
```

Reviewer: Order by comes before limit in the syntax, so I would do that here as well. Looks good otherwise.

Author: done

Reviewer: Thanks, this can be resolved.

The subquery can refer to attributes of the entities and subqueries in `FROM`. Those attributes can be referenced only by name, not by alias. Entities and subqueries in from, on the other hand, can only be referenced by alias, if there is one. They can be referenced by name only if there is no alias. 
To avoid ambiguity, it is recommended to always refer to attributes with corresponding entity names in format `<ModuleName>.<EntityName>.<AttributeName>` if there is no alias or `<Alias>.<AttributeName>` if there is an alias.

## 3 Subquery in FROM

Example:

```
SELECT
    ZipCode.City,
    ZipCode.ZipCode,
    AddressStats.AddressCount,
    AddressStats.FirstHouseYear
FROM
    Module.ZipCode AS ZipCode
    INNER JOIN (
        SELECT
           COUNT(*) AS AddressCount,
            MIN(YearBuilt) AS FirstHouseYear,
            ZipCode
        FROM
            Module.Address
        GROUP BY ZipCode
    ) AS AddressStats
    ON ZipCode.ZipCode = AddressStats.ZipCode
```

A subquery can be used in `FROM` in the same manner as an entity name. Subquery in `FROM` can return multiple columns and multiple rows.

> Similarly to subquery in `SELECT`, it can contain references to other entities and subqueries in `FROM` by alias if there is one and by name otherwise. Attributes can only be referenced by name.

Reviewer: I don't think this is true.

Reviewer: This can be resolved.

---

> title: "OQL Subqueries"

Reviewer 2: Is this new in 10.10? In this case, I think we should say which version it was introduced so we don't get questions from customers using 10.6 MTS.

Author: This was always somewhat supported, and some customers actually use it, but we fixed a couple of major bugs in 10.10

Reviewer 2: Then I don't think we need to mention anything here. I'll resolve this.

url: /refguide/oql-subqueries/
weight: 70
tags: ["oql", "studio pro"]
---

## 1 Description

> A subquery is a nested SELECT query inside a SELECT query. Subqueries can be used in a:

Reviewer 2: I was confused at first because it isn't just in the `SELECT` clause - but I realized that all the clauses below are part of a SELECT query.
I wondered if it would be clearer if we said something like:
```suggestion
A subquery is a nested SELECT query inside certain clauses of a SELECT query. Subqueries can be used in a:
```

* `SELECT` clause
* `FROM` clause
* `WHERE` clause

> * `HAVING` clause combined with `GROUP BY`

Reviewer 2: Subclauses are not explicitly mentioned in some of the related documentation. Should they be, or is this document sufficient?

Author: I moved the document to `oql-expressions`. Documentation pages for Where and Group By already contain the link to OQL Expressions page

Reviewer 2: Great - thanks.

A subquery must always be placed in parentheses.

## 2 Subquery in SELECT

Example:

```
SELECT
    City,
    ZipCode,
    (SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Module.Address WHERE Module.Address.ZipCode = ZipCode.ZipCode) AS NumberOfAddresses
FROM
    Module.ZipCode AS ZipCode
```

If a subquery is used in a `SELECT` clause, it should return exactly one column and at most one row. If it returns no rows, the value is replaced with `NULL`.

The subquery can refer to attributes of the entities and subqueries in the `FROM` clause. Those attributes can be referenced only by name, not by alias.

> Entities and subqueries in from, on the other hand, can only be referenced by alias, if there is one. They can be referenced by name only if there is no alias. 

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this at all. Probably because there are two 'FROM' clauses, one in the main select and one in the subclause and the two paragraphs are referring to different ones.

Looking at the example, above, does it mean the following, or have I totally misunderstood?
```suggestion
The subquery can refer to attributes of the entities and subqueries in the `FROM` clause of the subquery. Those attributes can be referenced only by name, not by alias (for example `Module.Address` in the example above).

Entities and subqueries in the main `FROM` clause of the main`SELECT` query, on the other hand, (for example `ZipCode` in the example above) must be referenced by alias, if there is one. If no alias is set, they can be referenced by name. 
```
Perhaps the example could include a clearer example of using something from the `FROM` clause of the subquery?

Author: I tried to make it clearer

To avoid ambiguity, it is recommended to always refer to attributes with corresponding entity names in the format `<ModuleName>.<EntityName>.<AttributeName>` if there is no alias or `<Alias>.<AttributeName>` if there is an alias.

## 3 Subquery in FROM

Example:

```
SELECT
    ZipCode.City,
    ZipCode.ZipCode,
    AddressStats.AddressCount,
    AddressStats.FirstHouseYear
FROM
    Module.ZipCode AS ZipCode
    INNER JOIN (
        SELECT
           COUNT(*) AS AddressCount,
            MIN(YearBuilt) AS FirstHouseYear,
            ZipCode
        FROM
            Module.Address
        GROUP BY ZipCode
    ) AS AddressStats
    ON ZipCode.ZipCode = AddressStats.ZipCode
```

A subquery can be used in a `FROM` clause in the same manner as an entity name. A subquery in a `FROM` clause can return multiple columns and multiple rows.

> In contrast with subquery in a `SELECT` clause, a subquery in a `FROM` clause cannot contain references to other entities and subqueries in `FROM`.

Reviewer 2: Again I find this confusing as there are two `FROM` clauses and I'm not sure which ones we are referring to.

## 4 Subquery in WHERE

There are two ways to use a subquery in a `WHERE`clause—as a value and as a collection.

> ### 4.1 Scalar Subqueries

Reviewer 2: I think the section titles and the introductory sentence should match to make navigation easier. So either we change this to **Value Subqueries** or we change the initial introduction to say **—as a scalar and as multiple rows**.

A scalar subquery is a subquery that returns exactly one row and exactly one column. In that case, its result can be considered a value. It can be used in a `WHERE` clause with the comparison operators `=`, `!=`, `<`, `<=`, `>`, `>=`.

Example:

```
SELECT
    *
FROM
    Module.House AS House
WHERE
    House.Price < (SELECT AVG(Price) FROM Module.House)
```

> ### 4.2 Multirow Subqueries

Reviewer 2: Or **Collection Subqueries** (see above).

A multirow subquery is a subquery that can have more than one row. If a subquery is used in a `WHERE` clause, it must always contain one column. Such a subquery can be referenced as a collection using the `IN` and `EXISTS` keywords.

Examples:

```
SELECT
    *
FROM
    Module.Venue AS Venue
WHERE
    Venue.Name IN (
        SELECT
            VenueName
        FROM
            Module.Event
        WHERE
            EventDate = '2025-04-01'
    )
```

```
SELECT
    *
FROM
    Module.Venue AS Venue
WHERE
    EXISTS (
        SELECT
            VenueName
        FROM
            Module.Event
        WHERE
            EventDate = '2025-04-01'
            AND
            VenueName = Venue.VenueName
    )
```

## 5 Subquery in HAVING

> A subquery can also be used in a `HAVING` clause similarly to how it is used in a `WHERE` clause. The difference is that only attributes and aggregates from the query can be referred to in the `HAVING` subquery.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A subquery can also be used in a `HAVING` clause in a similar way to a `WHERE` clause. The difference is that only attributes and aggregates from the query can be referred to in the `HAVING` subquery.
```
